---
layout: default
title: LIMITED USE LICENSE
---
<div style="text-align:center;font-weight:bold;">
<p>ROBLOX, INC.</p>
<p>LIMITED USE LICENSE</p>
</div>

Roblox, Inc. (“<u>Roblox</u>”) is making certain license for your access and use on a pre-release, trial, beta, evaluation, or similar limited purpose basis pursuant to this Limited Use License (the “<u>License</u>”).  By clicking agree, downloading, accessing, or using the software and materials (which may include associated data and data sets, models, and documentation) accompanying this License (the “<u>Licensed Software</u>”), you agree to be bound by the terms and conditions of this License, including acknowledging that your rights are conditioned on compliance with these terms and revocable at any time, that the Licensed Software is made available on an “as-is” basis without warranty or guarantee of any kind, and that Roblox expressly reserves all rights not expressly granted in this License.
Access and use of the Licensed Software may require applying for and maintaining an active registration with Roblox, the use of which account and associated services (the “<u>Service</u>”) is governed by separate terms (the “<u>Terms of Service</u>”).  

1.	**Evaluation Use of the Licensed Software.**  Subject to your complete and ongoing compliance with this License (including any applicable Terms of Service), Roblox grants you a limited, nonexclusive, non-transferable, non-sublicensable, revocable permission to access and use the Licensed Software during the License Term in accordance with applicable documentation, solely for the purpose of internal, non-production evaluation and testing of the Licensed Software, and only in connection with your otherwise permitted use of the Roblox products and services for which the Licensed Software was designed for use.

2.	**Source Code License.**  In the event that all or a portion of the Licensed Software is provided in source code form (the “Licensed Source”) the permission granted in Section 1 also includes the right to access and modify the Licensed Source, subject to the same limitations and restrictions as provided in Section 1 and elsewhere in this License and the Terms of Service.  The modified version or other derivatives of such Licensed Source (in source or compiled form) will be deemed Licensed Software hereunder.

3.	**Usage Guidelines.**  You must not use the Licensed Software to transmit unlawful or otherwise objectionable material, transmit viruses or other harmful computer code, interfere with the performance of the Service or the data contained therein, attempt to gain unauthorized access to the Service or networks related to the Service, or interfere with another’s use of the Service.  You must not distribute the Licensed Software or derivatives thereof in whole or in part, or  modify, copy, or make derivative works based on, or otherwise reverse engineer, disassemble, or decompile any portion of the Licensed Software not made available to you by Roblox in source form.  You may not access or use the Licensed Software or the Service in connection with any alternative or competitive service, or to otherwise reproduce, emulate, or replace features of the Service.  

4.	**Feedback.**  From time to time you may, but are not required to, provide Roblox with feedback regarding the Licensed Software, including by reporting any errors you encounter, providing suggestions for modifications and enhancements, submitting bug fixes, contributions, or other associated code, or other similar submission (“<u>Feedback</u>”).  You retain ownership of your rights in Feedback.  Notwithstanding, Feedback is provided to Roblox non-confidential basis (notwithstanding any indication to the contrary in any accompanying communication) and by submitting Feedback you hereby irrevocably grant Roblox and its successors an unrestricted, unlimited, worldwide, nonexclusive, transferable, sublicensable, fully paid up, royalty free, sublicensable (through multiple tiers) license to reproduce, distribute, publicly perform or display, and prepare derivatives of the Feedback, and to make, have made, use, sell, offer for sale, and import any product or service, and to practice any method disclosed in the Feedback, in any form or manner and without limitation, attribution, or compensation.  

5.	**Reservation of Rights.** Roblox retains all its right, title, and interest, including all intellectual property rights, in and to the Licensed Software and derivatives thereof, and nothing herein will be deemed to grant or confer on you any ownership of any such rights, whether expressly, by implication, estoppel, or otherwise.  You acknowledge that Roblox may track usage of the Licensed Software in connection with the Services, and Roblox retains unrestricted rights to such data, and any analytical results, models, methods or learnings derived therefrom.  

6.	**Additional Restrictions.**  Your testing of the Licensed Software and the results thereof and your Feedback, are all Roblox confidential information (“<u>Confidential Information</u>”) and may not be used for any purpose other than your testing and evaluation of the Licensed Software, or shared with any other person or company, nor may you (i) disclose, publish, or disseminate Confidential Information to anyone (ii) perform any benchmarking test or similar comparative research, (iii) disclose any results, opinions, or summaries of the Licensed Software or any Confidential Information.  

7.	**DISCLAIMER; LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.**  THE LICENSED SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED “AS IS” AND WITH ALL FAULTS.  TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW, ROBLOX HEREBY DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, WHETHER EXPRESS, IMPLIED, STATUTORY OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, NONINFRINGEMENT AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, OR THAT IT SHALL BE ERROR-FREE OR UNINTERRUPTED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL ROBLOX HAVE ANY DIRECT OR INDIRECT LIABILITY TO YOU FOR ANY REASON UNDER THIS LICENSE, INCLUDING ANY LOST PROFITS, LOSS OF DATA, LOSS OF USE, COSTS OF PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES, OR FOR ANY SPECIAL, PUNITIVE, OR EXEMPLARY DAMAGES HOWEVER CAUSED AND, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, TORT OR UNDER ANY OTHER THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER OR NOT THE PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.  In addition, you agree and understand that the Licensed Software may be provided on an alpha, beta, or other pre-release basis, and Roblox is under no obligation to make any further releases, including any production release, and that any subsequent release may differ from the Licensed Software in any manner Roblox sees fit, including addition, modification, or removal of features and functionality present in the Licensed Software.  You acknowledge that the limitations of liability and the disclaimers of warranties and damages set forth herein form an essential basis of the bargain between you and Roblox, and that they will survive and apply even if found to have failed of their essential purpose, to the greatest extent permissible pursuant to applicable law.

8.	**Term and Termination.**  This Agreement commences on the date you accept this License and, unless terminated earlier as described below or extended by mutual written agreement, shall terminate upon the later of (a) the License Term specified at the time you access the Licensed Software, or the public release of the production version of the Licensed Software (the “<u>License Term</u>”).  Roblox may terminate the License (and your access to the Licensed Software and any associated materials) at any time for any reason or no reason.  Any provisions that by their nature or express terms survive expiration or termination of this License will survive any expiration or termination of this License. Your obligations with respect to Confidential Information and Feedback will survive indefinitely, notwithstanding any eventual publication of a commercial or production version of the Licensed Software. Upon expiration or termination of this License for any reason, you must cease using the Licensed Software, and return or destroy copies of any Licensed Software or Licensed Source (and derivatives thereof) or other Confidential Information in your possession.
